[Music]
hi my name is Mark Ral and I'm here to
talk about the new hybrid cache API that
we're introducing in net 9 uh in
particular with asp.net core but it
works in in all your
applications
so with any new API the first question
is why so we're going to we're going to
discuss that first and then in order to
put that in context we're going to have
a quick recap of the existing
caches uh what how we use them and what
their limitations are again looking at
why we need a new API in hybrid cache uh
then we're going to have a look at
hybrid cache in use uh see how it
simplifies our code uh see what new
features it brings us uh and then I'll
I'll wrap up with a summary of the the
features that we're adding uh and the
the direction that we're going to with
this this new API so why are we adding a
new API the existing cache apis they
work but they they're very hard to to
use well and in particular they're hard
to use efficiently uh the the two main
apis that we'd be talking about there
are IM memory cache and I distributed
cach and both of those have uh great
features but they also have limitations
and uh pain points that make make them
awkward to use in most common
scenarios but also your code ends up
writing a lot of the things itself the
very the libraries do very little
internally
so what we're trying to do since cach is
so important is make it really easy to
use cach well and in particular the most
obvious code that you can write should
work efficiently and well and and
correctly without you needing to to
worry about all those
details so first thing I can do then is
to show an example using IM memory cache
as to what your what Your existing cache
applications might look like so I have
over here a fairly standard net 9
application web application uh and it's
very very simple I show you in a moment
uh but in particular uh in the first
version I'm going to show we don't have
any caching so basically I've got a uh
single web page uh that that acts talks
to a simulated service that very
deliberately just takes two and a half
seconds to invent some data um in the
real world we could be talking down to a
SQL database or to uh some uh large
language model uh HTTP uh grpc some some
expensive resource whenever we're
talking about caching we usually talk
about some expensive
resource so I've got a a simulated uh
data query that that's expensive so I've
started the application and now if I
switch over to a browser for this web
application and just refresh that we can
see the uh traffic start down here and
you can see we've got a simple page here
that took roughly 2 and a half seconds
and all it's done is generate a GD and
because we've got no caching if I
refresh that page every time I refresh
it I'll get a new grid down here and
it'll take two and a half seconds uh so
that that changing GD is making it clear
that we're we're doing new work each
time um now obviously taking two and a
half seconds isn't great um so and
performance is important in any
application so what we're going to do is
we're going to add some simple caching
to make this page run quicker and the
simplest way to do that is with IM
memory cache so if we go back to our
application uh if I look at the uh
original code that was uh that's just
calling that underlying data fetch what
I'm going to do I'm going to switch to a
a different implementation which uses so
this one requests I memory cache as a
service and in that same operation when
we get the expensive data uh we're going
to use memory cache so to use memory
cache first of all we need a unique key
for our query and since we're this is a
parameterized query we we take in an ID
here we're going to build that ID into
our key um and memory cache basically
has a get API and a set API so we're
going to ask the memory cache do you
have this value um and if if it doesn't
have it yet then we'll uh do the work to
go down and perform the expensive
operation and set that into the cache
and then uh whether we've got whether we
did that work this Qui request or
whether we got the value out of the
cache in this try get value we'll then
return that back to the caller so the
way I've got this uh working uh all I
need to do to change the implementation
that we're using is to come in and
change T it to use this with memory
cache implementation instead of our some
backend data service uh and if I save
that and restart our application
and when that's going I'll go back to
the web
application now if I load the first page
we expect it to take two and a half
seconds because we haven't uh the first
page needs to be we still need to do the
work once but now that I've uh done that
I can run it a few times and now it's
getting taking zero milliseconds and
importantly obvious it's just
expired um now when it's taking zero
milliseconds I'm getting I'm keeping
this ID so that means we're not doing
any extra work we're just getting that
value straight out of cache and that'll
last for a few seconds uh I think I've
got it configured for about 10 seconds
um
uh before it has to do the work again so
that's uh that's our memory cache but
the the limitations to that is of course
that's just running in process memory so
if we've got uh any kind of cold start
uh so the application recycles or if we
have multiple nodes we can get into uh
various problems either with an
inconsistent cache where as a consumer
bounces a caller bounces between
different websites they get different
values or we can get into the the
situation where it looks fine um until
everything shuts down and then all of a
sudden the entire site takes ages to let
start from from you know from uh a cold
cold
start so that's I memory cache it has
limitations but you can you can use it
it's relatively easy to use there's
another big limitation which is uh
there's no serialization going on here
it's actually holding handing back the
exact same object that you give it um
that is a good thing it's it doesn't
have any overhead but it's it's also
dangerous because if that object is
mutable so if you can change anything on
that you could then be handing out that
same object to lots and lots of requests
and if they make changes to it obviously
they're going to be changing the value
that's that's live in the in the cache
um so that's IR memory cache
uh again very simple to use there we
just register it with ad ad memory cache
and that's the same code we just looked
at there's one other thing we need to be
really really careful of when caching
which is stampede so what's
that normally uh if we just have uh one
request come in and we get a cash Miss
so that value isn't around that's fine
we'll just pay the cost we'll go down do
the work uh store it into cash and
everything's fine but if we're on a
really really busy site and all of us
our cash expires we suddenly get the
problem where we could have 10 20 200
requests all requesting that same bit of
data and all uh getting a cash Miss and
when that happens if we're not careful
all 200 of those requests can end up
doing the expensive operation which
obviously is going to have a lot of
overhead on your underlying system and
you can also get the problem where they
then do the work of storing that work
into the cash so what what does that
look like so if I go back to our website
here and it's it's a cold situation at
the moment all the cash has expired so
if I quickly run this from three
tabs you'll see all three of these
they've all got different uh IDs they've
all done the work and all three of them
took two and a half
seconds now now that we we've initiated
the cach it's nice and fast and they're
getting the the value out so that's
great but when we were under load we
were under a lot of pain there and that
can that can really hurt um systems
that's something we might want to avoid
so that's I me I memory cache the next
thing we might want to look at uh in the
existing systems that you're familiar
with is I distributed cache so what's I
distributed
cache that's a similar API to IM memory
cache but now we're talking about out to
process uh stores such as reddis SQL
Server SQL live
garet uh all of you it could even just
be a file system uh any anything that
lets us store data outside of the
process now that has two great
advantages in that uh it means that if
we do a cold start with the out
ofprocess data might still be available
so we don't have to pay that that cost
of just because we turned on the
restarted the the service we have no
cash um and the other thing is if we're
using a central server for that again
usually things like redis um we can then
have a consistent uh data store our
cache and configuring that we're getting
quite a bit more work now uh but it's a
very very similar concept we create a a
key for our data with our unique ID um
and call into the distributed cache has
got a a similar get API um if the data
isn't there which we we can tell by the
null uh then we need to go and do the
work um but now we need to actually
store it back into the cache which means
we need to serialize it um through some
serializer um could be Json could be XML
could be protuff and then we need to
store that data into the
cache um uh but if the data was there we
need to do the opposite so we need to
deserialize uh that those bytes that we
got so we're starting to do quite a bit
of of hard work here um but it's it's
relatively easy to set up so now that
I've changed the the service I can
restart the
application where's my build
error build error is
in
program.cs oh yeah my
bad
so so if I run
that restart our
application
and what I can also do is because we're
talking to redis um this view over here
shows reddish traffic and again I can
bring up our our web application
and now you can actually see some
reddish traffic coming in here so the
first time this we did a a hit on the
page it went down to redis to see if the
data was in there uh took two and half
seconds to do the actual work then it
pushed the data back into the redis and
we see that go again if I do a slow page
but now uh if I keep refreshing that
we're getting the zero milliseconds but
you can see it's going down to redis
each time to get that data um so overall
relatively easy to set up um but now
we're paying
the the cost of latency and bandwidth um
down to reddis each time and we can also
get into a lot of problems if our redis
server becomes unavailable for any any
reason um you know we're migrating the
uh the reddis cluster or or something
um and the the uted cache API uh plus
serialization Al can also add quite a
bit of overhead in terms of bite arrays
and things into our request so uh very
nice clean uh API really
but it has some pain
points what hybrid cach is meant to do
is to bridge all of these advantages so
let's go and have a look at what we can
do now what we really want to look at is
this new API hybrid cache
so let's have a look at
that because this is a new
API what we need to do is add a new
package reference into our
project so you can see here that I've
got a package reference to Microsoft
extensions caching hybrid which is a new
new get package that's hosting this um
at whatever the the current version is
and if I go to our program
CS when I'm registering I'm going to add
in uh call this add hybrid cache API and
that's going to register this new hybrid
cache server that we can use in our
application and there are various
options that uh that we can pass in on
this all I'm going to do for now is just
set a uh default expiration so the same
exporation that I'm using uh in the
other places and that's just going to
that's just going to simplify our code
there's lots of other things we can do
uh configuration wise I'm not going to
cover all of those here um
but the other thing of course is to
switch our implementation to hybrid
cache and if I go and look at what that
one's doing now we can see this is a lot
less code so hybrid cache we we still
have to come up with this unique string
that's going to represent our uh our key
for the cache but rather than having a a
separate get and set API hybrid cache
uses the the pattern that's already
exists in some other uh cache mechanisms
where we can do this get or create async
um method where we pass in a call back
to execute if the data isn't already
there um so that's that's really really
simple cuz all we need to do is say um I
want to use hybrid cache get me this
data here's the key here's the operation
to perform so I want to call down to the
the same expensive um operation that we
had before um forwarding the uh the
cancellation token uh that we we've
got
and if I restart it it's still going to
take two and a half seconds to do the
first page because we still need to do
the work once um but now if I do these
other Pages uh they all they took zero
millisecond so they haven't done the
work and they've got the same GD so we
know we know for sure they haven't done
the work but you'll notice on the left
here it didn't do any reddis oper redis
calls it stored the data down but on a
per page basis we haven't done anything
unless I let it expire um and again and
I can just go through these and they're
going to take 0o milliseconds and
they're not doing any traffic down to
redis so the way that works is hybrid
cache basically brings together the IM
memory cache API for inprocess memory
and the I distributed cache API for
outter process memory and uh takes care
of all the other things for us it deals
with the serialization it deals with um
uh very various other uh you know key
validation um things like that um but
importantly we've got one other thing
that it does that's that's really useful
is the stampe protection so if I quickly
refresh all of these Pages again they're
taking two and a half seconds like that
you might expect but rather than each of
them generating their own work with the
uh two and a half seconds we see that
they've actually all generated the same
GD and what's actually happened there is
the hybrid cache library has detected
that we've got three requests all
querying the same data that isn't
currently available so it's combined
those and it's only done the underlying
work once and it's queed up the other
requests um so that when the data comes
back from that one operation they all
get that result um so that significantly
reduces our overhead when we get when
we're under heavy load and we get a cash
Miss so if I run that again again we'll
get get the uh pay the cost the first
time um and then it all just works for
free so it's really really simple to set
up up and uh very easy to uh to work
with and behind the scenes it's using
Json serialization by default uh but
that's fully configurable uh so if you
have types that might work better with
protobuf or XML or you know any other
serializer we can configure all of that
um so again really really easy to set up
we just add in the hybrid cache package
um called add hybrid cache and then most
of the work is just hidden behind this
get or create sync uh method making it
really really simple to uh do all get
all of the right behavior um by default
um and if you're worried about the uh
the delegate allocation and capture
there's also a secondary API that allows
us to to pass in a state to to hand down
to our uh our call back uh so that we
also don't need to uh pay the cost of um
a capture context if you're in a really
really high throughput uh scenario but
for most purposes the the simple API
where we just um give it our ASN call
back that's going to be absolutely
fine uh so that's the the the core uh
parts of uh hybrid cache uh it's a new
cache API it's releasing alongside net 9
so what do I mean by that uh is that
it's not just targeting net 9 so if
you've got an existing net 8 uh
application whether that's for um
long-term support or a Net Framework
applic
you should be able to use this API um
it's much much simpler to use and
importantly you're much uh much simpler
to get right um and as we saw uh we get
the the Stampede protection and as we
discussed this now gives us much much
more predictable Behavior if the the
backend cache uh becomes unavailable or
anything else um UNT happens U lots of
exception handling built in so that uh
the cach isn't going to break your
application if there's something that
comes in um and we're also making use of
new apis so there's a low allocation API
very similar to ID distributed cache
that is uh available on some backend
providers so we've built this into the
SQL Server uh backend cache and the
redis backend cache and we would like to
help build those into any other uh ID
distributed cache implementations that
people are using whether that's uh
Cosmos or sqlite if we can help with
that um I'm more than happy to to jump
in there and see what we can do to help
it's not as complicated API um so uh
We've also got a lot of configuration uh
points in this API including the ability
to fully configure um serialization
either on a per type basis or if you've
got a a serializer that handles some
family of types you know you can handle
all Google Proto types for example
that's really easy to configure um and
we've also got um observability built in
so that's uh all of your your standard
uh events and counters um ETL that
should just work another new feature
that we're adding is the ability to uh
invalidate data based on tags so if
you've used output caching you'll be
familiar with this um so when we
actually add things to the cache in the
get or create API um I can optionally
specify one or more tags which are just
string tokens that map to whatever your
domain is for example you could uh in a
sales application you could tag data
that's in the you know the special
offers and then if you want to um reset
all of the data associated with special
offers because you uh it's Black Friday
or whatever you can just uh run a
command to uh invalidate all the data
associated with a specific tag and at a
single uh moment all of that data will
uh will become invalidated in one go um
much more efficient than having to know
all your keys to
invalidate we're also looking at back
end assisted um cach inv validation um
so obviously we've got the process uh we
got the problem if you've got an out
ofprocess cach on an inprocess cache
making sure that if if you want to
forcibly invalidate the out ofprocess
data that that gets into the inprocess
data ASAP um that's not won't be in the
net 9 initial version but we're looking
to add that as soon as possible um and
importantly what we're adding here isn't
just a new API it's a whole new
abstraction so yes when you call uh the
add hybrid cache registration you're
adding the default implementation but
because it's just an abstraction uh
other people are free to also Implement
that API and so I know Fusion cache are
looking to add an implementation with
their own features which and you know
that we may the inbuilt op the inbuilt
option may have features we don't
support and their option their
implementation may have more Fe other
features uh so you could got lots of
options there
so that's the uh the main overview of uh
hybrid cache um obligatory download.
net9 uh SL uh there's a a bunch of links
there to the uh the documentation that
exists on learn. microsoft.com uh the
new get package and the GitHub
repository and the demo code uh just to
clarify in terms of time scales uh this
API will still be preview when net 9
lands uh it's in the net extensions
family of libraries so this will be
shipping in the 9.1 release of net
extensions uh which is likely to be very
soon after net 9 uh I can't commit to a
specific date there um but uh you can
you can play with it uh now um but it'll
be uh GA in the 9.1 release of net
extensions uh that's pretty much it um
if there's any more questions uh on on
this topic please feel free to uh ping
me either on Twitter or directly and I
look forward to see hearing what you can
do with this API